Functions meetnetten (#56)
inbo/inbodb: vignettes/get_data_meetnetten.Rmd

---
title: "How to retrieve data from the meetnetten database"
author: "Toon Westra, Frederic Piesschaert"
date: 2024-06-25
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{How to retrieve data from the meetnetten database}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
tryCatch(
  con <- inbodb::connect_inbo_dbase("S0008_00_Meetnetten"),
  error = function(e) e,
  finally = database_access <- exists("con")
)
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>",
  eval = database_access,
  cache = FALSE
)
if (!database_access) {
  load("get_data_meetnetten_results.Rda")
}
```

# Introduction

The Flemish species monitoring programme [meetnetten.be](www.meetnetten.be) 

> consists of set of monitoring schemes for priority species in Flanders, the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consists of a set of monitoring schemes for priority species in Flanders, the 
```

northern part of Belgium. 
Each monitoring scheme consists of a number of monitoring sites at which target 
species are counted using a standardized protocol. 
The count data is stored in the meetnetten database which is maintained by the
Nature and Forest Research Institute (INBO).
We present some functions to easily access the data from the meetnetten 
database.

> # Aim

Reviewer: Should we mention that there is a time delay between the production database and the datawarehouse?

We make functions available to query data directly from the meetnetten database. 
This avoids writing your own queries.

We have provided functions to query

+ monitoring schemes included in the species monitoring programme
+ locations and sublocations (for example different sections of a transect) of 
the monitoring schemes
+ visits (count events)
+ observations
  
# Packages and connection

The main functions that we will use in this tutorial all start with 
`get_meetnetten_*`. 
These functions are made available by loading the `inbodb` package.

```{r setup, message = FALSE}
library(inbodb)
library(dplyr)
library(sf)
library(ggplot2)

```

These functions will only work for people with access to the INBO network. 

> As an INBO employee, you should make sure you have reading-rights for the INBO 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an INBO employee, you should make sure you have read rights for the INBO 
```

> DWH Server, otherwise place an ICT-call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datawarehouse server, otherwise place an ICT-call.
```

The following R-code can be used to establish a connection to the 
meetnetten database:

```{r connection_inbo}
con <- connect_inbo_dbase("S0008_00_Meetnetten")
```

# Functionality

## Information on monitoring schemes

> The function `get_meetnetten_schemes` gives an overview per species group of all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function `get_meetnetten_schemes()` gives an overview per species group of all
```
Als je een functienaam laat volgen door haakjes, dan maakt pkgdown op de website automatisch een link naar de documentatie van de functie in kwestie, wat voor een gebruiker heel handig is (naast het feit dat hij/zij zo impliciet sneller door heeft dat het over een functie gaat).  Misschien handig om dit overal in de documentatie toe te passen bij verwijzingen naar functies (ook bij de help van functies en NEWS.md kan dit)?

(Zie ook [hier](https://pkgdown.r-lib.org/articles/linking.html).)

Author: OK. Is aangepast.

Algemene Broedvogelmonitoring Vlaanderen. 

```{r get_scheme}
scheme_info <- get_meetnetten_schemes(con)
```

```{r eval=TRUE}
scheme_info
```

## Locations and sublocation of monitoring schemes

Each monitoring scheme consists of a fixed set of locations where the target
species is/are counted on a regular basis.
Some locations are subdivided in sublocations.
This is, for example, the case for most butterfly monitoring schemes, where the 
sublocations represent the 50 meter sections of a transect.

The function `get_meetnetten_locations` returns the locations and the
sublocations for one or several monitoring scheme.
It returns a list of two `sf` objects: `main_locations` and `sublocations`.

In the following example we select the locations and sublocations of the
Argusvlinder (*Lasiommata megera*) monitoring scheme.

```{r example_locations}

locations <- get_meetnetten_locations(con,
                                      scheme_name = "Argusvlinder")

main_locations <- locations$main_locations

sublocations <- locations$sublocations

```

Let's have a look at the `main_locations`.

```{r, eval = TRUE}
main_locations %>%
  head(5)
```

> Two variables need some further explanations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two variables need some further explanation:
```

+ `is_sample`. For more common species, a random sample is drawn from all
locations in Flanders where the target species occurs.
For location that are selected `is_sample` = `TRUE`.
Locations that are not selected, indicated by `is_sample` = `FALSE`, can be
counted optionally.

> + `is_active`. When `is_active` = `FALSE`, the location is not counted any more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ `is_active`. When `is_active` = `FALSE`, the location is no longer counted.
```

This is the case when the location appears to be inaccessible or when the target

> species does not occur at the location any more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
species does not occur at the location anymore.
```

However, most often these inactive locations where counted in previous years.
So the the database also contains observations for (currently) inactive
locations. 

Next, let's have a look at the sublocations of the location Arenbergpolder.
The locations consists of 14 sections.

> Note that we only show the active (`is_active` = `TURE`) sublocations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that we only show the active (`is_active` = `TRUE`) sublocations. 
```

visits <- get_meetnetten_visits(con,
                                scheme_name = "Argusvlinder",
                                collect = TRUE)

```

```{r, eval = TRUE}
visits %>%
  filter(location == "Arenbergpolder") %>%
  select(location, visit_id, start_date, 
         start_time, visit_status)
```

Use `?get_meetnetten_visits` to get more information on the variables that are
returned by the function.

## Observations

The function `get_meetnetten_observations` provides all observations for one 
or more monitoring scheme.

Let's select all observations from one visit at the Arenbergpolder location
of the Argusvlinder monitoring scheme, by applying a filter based on the
variable `visit_id`.

```{r example_observations}

observations <- get_meetnetten_observations(con,
                                            scheme_name = "Argusvlinder",
                                            collect = FALSE) %>%
  filter(visit_id == 1080) %>%
  collect()

```

First we take a look at the observation of the target species.

```{r, eval = TRUE}

observations %>%
  filter(target_species) %>%
  select(location, sublocation, start_date, 
         scientific_name, count)
```

> Optionally observers can also record other species that can be counted using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally observers can also record non target species that can be counted using the
```

same protocol.

The code below provides the total number of individuals per species,
including the non target species, that were counted in one visit at the
Arenberpolder location.

```{r, eval = TRUE}

observations %>%
  group_by(start_date, target_species, name_nl, scientific_name) %>%
  summarise(count_total = sum(count)) %>%
  ungroup()
```

Use `?get_meetnetten_observations` to get more information on the variables that
are returned by the function. 

An important note: before you start analysing the data from a certain monitoring
scheme, it is important to know how the monitoring schemes were designed and how
the data is organised.
So don't forget to check the monitoring protocol (available on the 
[INBO website](https://www.vlaanderen.be/inbo/zoeken/?q=monitoringsprotocol)).

## Closing the connection

Close the connection when done

```{r closing_conn}
dbDisconnect(con)
rm(con)
```

> ```{r echo=FALSE, include=FALSE}

Reviewer 3: only save the image when the file in not present

rm(database_access)
save.image(file = "get_data_meetnetten_results.Rda")
```

> # Data policy

Reviewer: Wat met projecten met beperkte toegang, zoals de wintertellingen vleermuizen? Moeten we niet meegeven dat die vleermuizendata zeker nooit zomaar gepubliceerd mogen worden zonder overleg met de vleermuiswerkgroep?

Reviewer 2: Suggestie: als je zeker wil zijn dat iedereen die boodschap krijgt, overweeg dan om (ook) een warning te geven ingeval die gegevens opgevraagd worden.  Ga er zeker niet van uit dat iedereen het vignet leest en de volledige inhoud onthoudt tot het eens van toepassing is. ;-)

Author: In de tutorial houd ik het graag zo generiek mogelijk. Ik heb nu toegevoegd om altijd info@meetnetten.be te contacteren voor resultaten te publiceren. Zo kunnen we nagaan of de publicatie conform is met de afspraken die dan geldig zijn. Meer details kunnen we dan op het infomoment geven.

Reviewer 2: Lees jij altijd een tutorial vooraleer je een package gebruikt?  Eerlijk gezegd: als je het echt belangrijk vindt dat gebruikers die boodschap krijgen, dan zou ik die boodschap toch ergens geven bij het runnen van de functie(s).  Dit moet geen warning zijn, het mag gewoon een 'message' zijn die verschijnt tijdens het runnen van een `get_meetnetten`-functie.  (Doordat het maar over een deel van de functies van inbodb gaat, lijkt een opstartboodschap bij inbodb me minder geschikt, anders was dat ideaal geweest.)  Tidyverse heeft soms boodschappen die eenmaal om de 8 uur verschijnen, misschien is zoiets een ideetje om de gebruiker niet te vervelen met constante boodschappen en ze er toch bij elk gebruik even aan te herinneren?

Since many of the target species are sensitive species, we do not publicly make 
available the exact location of the observations.
Location information is generalized to 1, 5 or 10 km Universal Transverse 

> Mercator (UTM) grid cells, when publishing the data on [GBIF](www.gbif.org).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mercator (UTM) grid cells, when publishing the data on [GBIF](https://www.gbif.org).
```
`https://` toevoegen is nodig om bij klikken op een link op een website uit te komen (redirect werkt enkel als je een website zelf intypt in een browser)

The generalisation rules are the same as in 

> [waarnemingen.be](www.waarnemingen.be).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[waarnemingen.be](https://www.waarnemingen.be).
```

Please respect this policy when you publish results based on the meetnetten
data.

> When in doubt, contact [info@meetnetten.be](info@meetnetten.be).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When in doubt, contact <info@meetnetten.be>.
```
Ik vermoed dat dit het gedrag geeft wat je zou willen?  (De link gaf in elk geval aan dat het bestand waarnaar verwezen werd, niet bestond.)
Eventueel ook even nagaan in hoeverre het een goed idee is om dat emailadres open op het internet te zetten.  Er zijn manieren om dit te escapen (iets rond het emailadres zetten), waardoor het moeilijker te lezen is voor spambots, al weet ik niet of dat nog gangbaar is.
